Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 1 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 2 of 50

SKILLS BOOTCAMP IN PLANT
OPERATIONS
Learner Workbook: Forward Tipping Dumper

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 3 of 50

OUR COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENTING AN INDUSTRY LEADING OPERATED
PLANT MODEL
We hope that you enjoy your training with us and that you get the maximum benefit possible
out of the course that you have registered for.
Learner success is at the core of our delivery strategy. Our commitment to high quality
training delivery supports the industry-wide need to develop the future generation of plant
operators.
In addition to being approved by the Department for Education (DfE) to deliver the skills
bootcamp programme, we are an accredited training provider, registered with the two main
plant operator card schemes in the construction plant training sector, namely CPCS and
NPORS.
All trainers and testers are highly experienced in their field and are registered with either of
the two accreditation schemes, some are registered with both.

WHAT CAN YOU EXPECT DURING YOUR TRAINING?
You can expect the highest level of training and testing, delivered by experienced, and highly
competent trainers and testers. We ensure that our people maintain their high standards
through robust internal and external quality assurance measures. We provide an inclusive
approach to our training delivery model to ensure our courses are accessible where
possible.
For more information about the Skills Bootcamp in Plant Operations, visit our website:
www.flanneryplant.com/plant-operator-training

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 4 of 50

CONTENTS
WHAT CAN YOU EXPECT DURING YOUR TRAINING?​

2

HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE​

4

ALWAYS REMEMBER TO OperateSAFE​

4

LITERACY – NUMERACY – ICT​

4

INTRODUCTION TO THE FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER​

5

SAFE WORKING PRACTICES - THE ROLE OF THE FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER
OPERATOR​

6

HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK ACT 1974​

8

PROVISION & USE OF WORK EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS 1998 (PUWER 98)​

10

ADDITIONAL LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE:​

11

RISK ASSESSMENTS AND METHOD STATEMENTS​

11

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES​

12

SITE INDUCTION​

13

OPERATOR ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES​

13

MAJOR COMPONENTS OF A FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER​

15

DIFFERENT TYPES OF DUMPER & SKIPS​

16

PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS OF THE MACHINE​

17

PRE-OPERATIONAL CHECKS - MANUFACTURERS AND LEGISLATIVE
REQUIREMENTS​

20

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)​

20

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 5 of 50

SAFELY GET ON AND OFF THE FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER​

21

PREPARE AND CONFIGURE THE FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER FOR SITE TRAVEL​ 21
VISIBILITY AIDS​

24

PEDESTRIANISED AREAS​

25

TRAVELLING ON A PUBLIC HIGHWAY​

25

TOWING EQUIPMENT WITH A DUMPER – ENHANCED TRAINING​

26

TRAVEL AND MANOEUVRE THE DUMPER​

27

TRAVEL AND MANOEUVRE IN AREAS OF RESTRICTED SPACE​

31

OPERATING IN CONFINED AREAS​

31

CONDUCT ALL NECESSARY SAFETY CHECKS AT THE LOADING AND DISCHARGING
AREA​
35
ENSURE LOAD INTEGRITY/ SECURITY​

36

LOADING, TRANSPORTING AND DISCHARGING DIFFERENT MATERIALS​

36

DISCHARGING LOADS​

37

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS OF MACHINE USE​

40

LOADING/ UNLOADING PROCEDURES FOR MACHINE TRANSPORTATION​

41

GLOSSARY OF TERMS​

46

HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE
This guide has been produced to help you through the course
and helps to reinforce the learning that you will receive
throughout the course.
Throughout the workbook you will come across QR codes
which you can scan using your android or IOS smartphone.
These will lead you to additional content including videos and
additional reading materials.
You will also find some Notepads and OperateSafe stops with
some helpful reminders. To your right is a notepad with some
ways to gain maximum benefit from your training.
Throughout the workbook, you will find KNOWLEDGE STOP’s.
This is your chance to put your learning to the test.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 6 of 50

ALWAYS REMEMBER TO OperateSAFE
Throughout the workbook, you will come across OperateSAFE safety
reminders. OperateSAFE is an example of a company wide Health &
Safety campaign which is championed by Flannery Plant Hire. It is a
campaign aimed at driving health and safety awareness and
engagement across the business and industry wide. Other companies
will champion their own internal and external health and safety
campaigns which we encourage you to familiarize yourself with when
starting at a new job.
The OperateSAFE safety reminders throughout the workbook aim to
highlight key safety messages to our learners. Scan the QR code
here to view the OperateSafe introduction video.

LITERACY – NUMERACY – ICT
English, Mathematics and ICT are embedded into
the content. You will be required to extract
information from the operator manual, conduct
simple calculations of bucket capacities and read
digital screens in the cab of the machine or using
one of our training simulators.

INTRODUCTION TO THE FORWARD
TIPPING DUMPER
A Forward Tipping Dumper (FTD) is commonly
used on construction sites. It is used to transport
large quantities of materials across a site, usually on rough,
undulating terrain. Its ability to handle a mixture of terrain and
carry large loads makes it a flexible piece of equipment. This
course will equip you with the knowledge, skills and
confidence to operate the machine safely, protecting both you
and those around you. This course offers two certificate
options: operating either a tracked or wheeled machine
depending on your needs.
The course objectives are as follows:
​ Understand the relevant legislation relating to work
activities.
​ Comply with the manufacturer's instructions, using the
operator's handbook and other information sources.
​ Identify the hazards associated with plant or machinery operations and put the
appropriate control measures in place.
​ Identify the machine components and operator controls.
​ Perform pre-shift and operational checks.
​ Prepare the forward tipping dumper for site and road travel.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 7 of 50

​ Drive over various types of terrain.
​ Manoeuvre in confined areas.
​ Complete a range of loading procedures.
​ Discharge loads into trenches or over edges
​ Explain the procedures for loading and unloading on and off a transporter.
​ Shut down machinery safely and secure it at the end of the operation.
N.B. All content delivered on this course meets the requirements set out in the National
Occupational Standards for this machine type

CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATIONS
Construction sites are busy places and present many dangers. During
this course you will be taught how to act responsibly on site, how to
identify common hazards and how to operate your machine safely
and efficiently on site to reduce to as low as possible the risks to you
and others.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 8 of 50

SAFE WORKING PRACTICES RELEVANT TO THE ROLE OF THE FORWARD
TIPPING DUMPER OPERATOR
Preparing for work
Travelling and maneuvering
Setting up for work
Working tasks

Shutting Down

Conduct all pre – operational checks in
accordance with manufacturers and legislative
requirements.
Travel and maneuver the forward tipping dumper
safely across varying terrain and inclines.
Conduct all necessary safety checks at the loading
and discharging areas.
●​ Receive loads from other machines safely.
●​ Ensure load integrity and security.
●​ Tip safely into excavations or over edges.
●​ Completing work
●​ The environmental considerations of
machine use
●​ Loading/ unloading procedures for machine
transportation.
Carry out all end of work and shut down
procedures.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 9 of 50

HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK ACT 1974
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 is designed to protect people
and the environment from workplace activities. It places certain duties
and responsibilities on employers, employees, self-employed,
designers and manufactures.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 10 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 11 of 50

PROVISION & USE OF WORK EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS 1998 (PUWER 98)
Work equipment is any machinery, appliance, apparatus, tool or installation for use at work
(whether exclusively or not). This includes equipment which employees provide for their own
use at work. The scope of work equipment is therefore extremely wide.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 12 of 50

Machines must be stable when in use; machines have been known to fall over. ROPS (Roll
Over Protective Structures) & FOPS (Falling Object Protective Structures) must be in place
to provide some protection to the operator in the event of the machine overturning or from
small falling objects.
Equipment must be capable of being maintained safely. Accidents occur during maintenance
thus the risks encountered during such maintenance must be reduced.

ADDITIONAL LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE:
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations (MHSWR)
Construction (Design and Management) Regulations (CDM)
Vibration at Work Regulations
Road Traffic Act
HSG 114 – The safe use of vehicles on construction sites
HSG 46 – Guide for small contractors
Plant Safety Group – Safe use of dumpers
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations
The Control of Noise Regulations

RISK ASSESSMENTS AND METHOD STATEMENTS
Employers are required by law to protect your employees, and others, from
harm.
Under the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, the
minimum you must do is:
●​ Identify what could cause injury or illness in your business

(hazards)
●​ Decide how likely it is that someone could be harmed and how

seriously (the risk)
Take action to eliminate the hazard, or if this isn't possible, control the risk.
The purpose of a Method Statement when on site is to
document given specific instructions on how to SAFELY
perform a work-related task.
It is the plant operator’s responsibility to COMPLY with the
Method Statement.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 13 of 50

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES
In general plant operators are regarded as ‘safety-critical’
workers, which means their actions with the machine can
have significant health & safety consequences for
themselves and others.
It is essential that all personnel involved in the planning,
supervision and carrying out of mobile plant operations
are adequately trained and competent for their role.

SITE INDUCTION

●​

Access and egress

●​

Safety signs and signals

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 14 of 50

●​

Accident reporting

●​

Confined spaces

●​

Emergency
procedures

●​

Buried services

●​

Reporting structure

●​

Contamination

●​

PPE/RPE
requirements

●​

Electricity

●​

Welfare facilities

●​

Lifting operations

●​

Reporting procedures

●​

Working from/at height

●​

Site Layout

●​

Waste disposal

●​

Traffic Routes

●​

Smoking policy

●​

Restricted/prohibited
areas

When starting work on
a new site you will
undergo
a
site
induction. Familiarise
yourself with some of
the subject areas that
will be included in a site
induction.

OPERATOR ROLES
&
RESPONSIBILITIES

As a ‘safety critical’ worker, plant operators are required
to:
✔​ Only use site plant or equipment if you are trained,

competent and have been authorised to do so.
✔​ Only authorised operators should hold vehicle keys.
✔​ You are required to work safely, efficiently and comply with the method statement.
✔​ Be punctual and co-operate with other workers – this can contribute towards repeat

business with the client or principal contractor.
Operators should also be trained in the safe operation of the specific machine that
they are required to operate, which will include:
●​ Layout and operation of the controls.
●​ Stability limits.
●​ Daily checks and how to do them safely.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 15 of 50

Always use the operator’s manual for the machine you are operating. This includes safety
information, maintenance and information on operation.
Good timekeeping, being polite, being safe and doing a good job are all ways of
ensuring repeat business with a client or principle contractor.
Additional Sources of Information
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​
●​

Codes of Practice
Site plans / drawings
Risk assessments and method statements
COSHH Regulations
Safety data sheets
Load / tare sheets
Inspection and reporting forms / procedures

Forward Tipping Dumper

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 16 of 50

MAJOR COMPONENTS OF A FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 17 of 50

DIFFERENT TYPES OF DUMPER & SKIPS

PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS OF THE MACHINE

Unit Always wear gloves when checking engine oil to prevent skin disease and
contamination of oil onto the operating controls and the cab.
Always ensure the filler cap area is clean and pressure in the system is
Hydraulic
released before removing the cap. Always use a clean container when
System
filling the system to prevent contamination.
Where possible, plant should be filled up at the end of your shift to prevent
Fuel System condensation building up in the tank.
Cooling
Cooling systems are normally pressurised and removing the cap can allow
System
hot water to escape with the potential for causing SEVERE burns.
Roll Over
ROPS provides some protection to the operating position (as far as is
Protective
reasonably practicable) in the event of an overturn.
Structure
Falling
Where there is the risk of people operating mobile work equipment being
Object
struck by falling material, falling object protective structures (FOPS) or a
Protective
manufacturer’s strengthened cab must be fitted to stop any falling material
Structures
Power
– Oils

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 18 of 50

Restraining
Systems
Tyres

striking the operator. When sitting in an enclosed cab that meets FOPS
criteria, a hard hat does not need to be worn.
Seat belts must be worn even when the cab door is closed. This is
because in the event of a roll over (as far as reasonably practical), it will
keep the operator within the confines of the operating seat which may
minimise injury.
Raised lugs on tyres provide traction / grip for moving, steering and braking
in soft mud. If tyres are worn, traction and grip will be severely affected.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 19 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 20 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 21 of 50

PRE-OPERATIONAL CHECKS IN ACCORDANCE WITH
MANUFACTURERS AND LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 states that employees must take
reasonable care of themselves and others who may be affected by their
actions.
It is a requirement to check that the machine is safe to use prior to using it.
The following items must be checked prior to use:

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
Always ensure that you wear
the full PPE required for the
site that you are working on.

✔​ Head protection
✔​ Foot protection
✔​ High-visibility clothing
✔​ Weather-appropriate
clothing

✔​ Hearing protection
✔​ Eye protection

✔​ Gloves
Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 22 of 50

SAFELY GET ON AND OFF THE FORWARD TIPPING
DUMPER

✔​ Face the machine using the specific steps and handrails
provided.

✔​ Maintain 3 points of contact wherever possible.
✔​ Ensure the steps and handrails are clean and clear of debris
in your daily checks.

✔​ Ensure the ground you are stepping out onto or walking on is
firm and clear of obstructions before existing the cab.
Wearing the correct boots can eliminate injuries.
Ensure they are laced up fully and worn correctly.

PREPARE AND CONFIGURE THE FORWARD TIPPING DUMPER FOR SITE
TRAVEL
✔​ Engine cover – secured.
✔​ Check parking brake – on.
✔​ Check controls are neutralised.
✔​ Adjust seat for comfort / reach.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 23 of 50

✔​ Adjust steering column as appropriate.
✔​ Wear seatbelt – adjust as required.
✔​ Foot brake – pressure.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 24 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 25 of 50

VISIBILITY AIDS
Always ensure that all mirrors / cameras are correctly fitted, unbroken, clean, and correctly
adjusted.
Check that ALL mirrors are clean and correctly positioned to provide you with a clear,
unobstructed view behind the dumper.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 26 of 50

PEDESTRIANISED AREAS
If you are setting up to work in pedestrianised areas,
always take the following into consideration.
●​ Always ensure physical segregation of
pedestrians from machines and the work
●​ Machine movements
●​ Noise
●​ Fumes

TRAVELLING ON A PUBLIC HIGHWAY
When travelling on the public highway, the machine must adhere to the following
requirements by law:
✔​ The dumper must be registered and taxed as a “special vehicle”
✔​ The dumper must have vehicle insurance
✔​ If the dumper can exceed 20 mph it must have a horn in good working condition
✔​ If it can exceed 25 mph it must have a speedometer in good working condition
✔​ It must have brakes that enable it to stop
✔​ It must have lights and indicators
The operator must:
✔​ Hold a full UK or approved car license (Category B)

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 27 of 50

✔​ Be a minimum of 18 years old for vehicles beween 3.5T and 7.5T
✔​ Be a minimum of 21 years old for vehicles exceeding 7.5T (MAM)

TOWING EQUIPMENT WITH A DUMPER – ENHANCED TRAINING
Some dumpers have the capability to tow equipment such as small bowsers and
compressors. As dumpers are not specifically designed for towing purposes, other methods
should be explored before deciding on this purpose.
Towing with a dumper requires enhanced training, in addition to the training delivered within
the Skills Bootcamp programme. To assist with your knowledge and understanding of this
‘safety critical’ activity, below outlines some key safety information when towing with a
dumper.
Should you be asked to tow equipment, you must consider the following points:
✔​ All options have been considered and there no other more suitable machine is
available.
✔​ Towing activities are authorised by the manufacturer of the dumper to be used.
✔​ The equipment to be towed does not exceed the specification set by the
manufacturer in terms of the weight of the equipment and the downward load
imposed on the towing point.
✔​ The towing bracket is compatible with the towing eye on the equipment to be towed.
✔​ You have been trained and are competent to carry out towing activities.
✔​ The correct towing pin for the towing bracket is used and that the safety pin is located
correctly in the towing pin.
✔​ Towing balls come in a variety of sizes and where the size of ball differs from the
towed equipment’s towing hitch, there is a danger that the hitch can dislodge from
the ball and the towed equipment become detached from the dumper.
✔​ The manufacturers handbook should be consulted to ensure a full understanding of
the towing restrictions placed by the manufacturer. It should be noted that
manufacturers requirements differ between different models from the same
manufacturer.

✔​ The towing ability of the dumper may depend on whether the trailer is fitted with an
overrun brake or is non-braked. Using an overweight non-braked trailer could cause
loss of control during the braking activity.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 28 of 50

TRAVEL AND MANOEUVRE THE DUMPER
When travelling and manoeuvring the dumper, it is
important to ensure machine stability to reduce the risk of
the dumper becoming stuck or tipping over.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 29 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 30 of 50

When operating a rotating seat dumper, you can change the seat and
console position to allow the operator the best viewpoint while travelling,
manoeuvring and operating the machine. The entire operating platform rotates 180 degrees.
You may have viewed the pre-operational checks video earlier in this workbook, but please
scan the QR code to view again.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 31 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 32 of 50

TRAVEL AND MANOEUVRE IN AREAS OF RESTRICTED SPACE
Overhead Services
It is important that all work near to overhead lines is properly planned and
managed to reduce the risk of accidents.
The Health and Safety Executive publication ‘Avoiding danger from overhead
power lines’ (GS6) gives valuable information and guidance on how to safely
plan and set up work near to overhead power lines.

High voltage electricity can arc across large gaps in certain conditions.

OPERATING IN CONFINED AREAS

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 33 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 34 of 50

The Spillard Human Detection System identifies only human form
through deep intelligent mapping. It aims to:

✔​ Warn operators and pedestrians of potential risks of collision.
✔​ Improve operators all around awareness of their surroundings.
✔​ Detect human form whilst ignoring ever changing backgrounds.
✔​ Reduce risk whilst improving the operator and pedestrian interaction.

The human detection system is an aid to safety
only.
It must be used in addition to the site’s safe
system of work.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 35 of 50

Safety Shield AI Collision Avoidance Technology
Safety Shield is an advanced AI human form recognition safety
system. The system cleverly integrates AI human form recognition
(HFR) with strategically placed HD cameras.
The in-cab LED visual and audio alert warns the driver of a pedestrian
in proximity.
An additional module can be fitted for an external alarm and Digital
Thumbs Up LED display to allow site personal to approach the
machine safely and from the correct direction.
The Safety Shield system scans
and detects all objects around it,
but the smart technology will
only alert the operator to
pedestrians and vulnerable site
personnel entering the danger
recognition zones. By filtering
out objects other than humans,
the Safety Shield system
reduces unnecessary
distractions for the plant
operator.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 36 of 50

CONDUCT ALL NECESSARY SAFETY CHECKS AT THE LOADING AND
DISCHARGING AREA
Prior to setting up for work, the operator must conduct
safety checks at the work area to identify any potential
hazards.

ENSURE LOAD INTEGRITY/ SECURITY
Prior to transporting the load, the following actions
must be taken:

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 37 of 50

•​
•​
•​
•​

Ensure the load is secured and stable.
Check your travel route.
Arrange assistance for observation and visibility.
Never overload the skip. Overloading obscures the operator’s view and significantly
reduces visibility. This increases the hazards associated with the people, plant
interface.

It is the dumper operator responsibility to determine maximum load. Always refer to the
manufacturer’s guidelines.

LOADING, TRANSPORTING AND DISCHARGING DIFFERENT MATERIALS
Denser materials: may overload your tyres and may stick to the body when tipping. You
may need to tip at different locations.
Semi-Fluid materials: may spill during travel.
Spoil: this material should be segregated for re-use on or off-site, where possible. It must be
placed a minimum distance of the depth of the trench away from the excavation to prevent
collapse.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 38 of 50

DISCHARGING LOADS
A banksman should be used if deemed necessary in the
risk assessment. Cameras are there as a visual aid
when approaching the tipping area / stop block.
Stop blocks are used to indicate the stopping point of the
dumper and to prevent the machine from overrunning
into the trench.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 39 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 40 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 41 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 42 of 50

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS OF MACHINE USE
The main types of pollution associated with construction operations
are:
●​ Air pollution
●​ Water pollution
●​ Noise pollution
There are various pollution prevention strategies that can be used.
Operators can minimise their effect on the environment by using
the machine efficiently:
●​
●​
●​
●​

Lower engine speeds where possible.
Ensure there is no spillage of fluids.
Keep the machine well maintained.
Ensure prior planning of the work task.

LOADING/ UNLOADING PROCEDURES FOR MACHINE TRANSPORTATION
The transporter driver is responsible for loading operations. The following checks should be
made before loading commences:
Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 43 of 50

✔​ Ground support
✔​ Ramp condition
✔​ Overhead and other hazards
✔​ Positioning on trailer

✔​ Direction of travel
The following process should be followed when loading the transporter:
✔​ Remove any dirt or debris from the
trailer.
✔​ Check parking brake.
✔​ Check trailer bodywork for signs of
damage.
✔​ Position loading ramps securely on the
transporter.
✔​ Stop the engine and secure the machine.
✔​ Chock wheels to prevent movement.
✔​ Engage chassis locking bar.
✔​ Secure to the trailer.
✔​ Ensure legal load (height/weight of trailer)

Exclusion zone
Always ensure an exclusion zone is in place prior to commencing the loading activity. In
areas of no space restrictions, the exclusion zone must:
●​ Always be clear of personnel.
●​ Should have a minimum clearance of at least the height of the highest point of the
machine.
●​ Sites with space restrictions will require a risk assessment and driver briefing of the
site-specific measures and procedures (e.g. motorways with restricted space).

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 44 of 50

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 45 of 50

END OF WORK AND SHUT DOWN PROCEDURES
When parking the machine at the end of the work
period, you must follow the full shut down procedure.
Consider where you park your machine. DO NOT
park your machine on site roads, pedestrian routes,
soft/wet/steep ground, blocking access / egress
routes from buildings.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 46 of 50

Additional Notes

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 47 of 50

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
TERM
Forward Tipping
Dumper
Access
Actuating
Articulated
Backfilling
Banksman
Beacon
Blind Spots
Boom
Brake Test
Bucket
Cabbed Dumper
Cab / Operator's Cab
Centre of Gravity
Chassis
Check Valves
Collapse
Consequences
Contour
Counterbalance
Crush Zone
Cut and Fill
Deadman
Differential Lock
Discharging
Edge Protection
Egress
Exclusion Zone
Expansion Tank
F.O.P.S.

DEFINITION
A construction machine designed to carry and unload loose material
by tipping its skip forward over the front wheels.
To be able to get to a place.
Cause (a machine or device) to operate.
Having two or more sections connected by a flexible joint.
The process of filling in excavated areas with transported material.
A person who guides the machine operator during movement, especially in
confined spaces and when reversing.
A flashing safety light mounted on the ROPS/top of cab to alert others
when the machine is in operation.
Areas around the dumper not visible to the operator, requiring caution.
The main arm attached to a 360’s body that supports the dipper and
bucket.
A routine check to ensure the dumper’s braking system is functioning
correctly and safely before operation, typically performed at the start of a
shift.
The attachment on a 360 used for digging, grading, trenching or loading
duties.
Dumper fitted with an enclosed operator cab, providing protection from
weather and site conditions.
The compartment where the operator sits to control the machine, often
equipped with joysticks and pedals.
Balance point of a load.
The main framework of the machine to which all components are mounted.
Valve monitoring pressure of the system.
The sudden failure of the sides or walls of an excavation, causing soil or
materials to cave in.
The effect, result, or outcome of something occurring earlier
To change the shape of a surface, making some parts higher and some
parts lower
A weight that balances another weight.
An area where a person could be crushed between moving parts of
machinery or between a moving part and a stationary object.
A process involving the removal (cut) and redistribution (fill) of earth to
level ground.
The Deadman lever is a safety control mechanism on a machine that must
be placed in the isolated (neutral or safe) position to disable machine
movement before anyone approaches the machine.
A feature that locks the drive axles for better traction on slippery or uneven
terrain.
The process of unloading material from the skip.
A safety system or stop block installed at the edge of elevated work areas
to prevent people, materials, or equipment from falling.
To be able to leave a place.
A designated area where access is restricted due to potential hazards,
such as heavy machinery, or dangerous operations.
Prevents the system from becoming over-pressurised as the coolant heats
up and expands.
Falling Object Protective Structure - a safety feature built into the cab or
canopy of the machine designed to protect the operator from falling
objects, such as rocks, debris, or materials from above.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 48 of 50

Front Axle
GPS
Gradients
Human Form
Recognition (HFR)
Hydraulics
Hydraulic Rams
Inclines
Isolation Procedure
Laden Skip
Load Capacity
Loading
Loading Area/Zone
Load Integrity
Load Limits
Load Security
Hauling
Manoeuvre
Material Handling
Muck Shifting
Oscillating
Overloaded
People, Plant Interface
Pressurised
Rear Axle
Red Zone
Restraining Systems
Reversing Alarm
Risk Assessment
R.O.P.S.
Rotating Seat Dumper
Safety Critical

Supports the front wheels, often provides steering capability, and transmits
drive power depending on the dumper’s drivetrain.
Helps ensure precise digging by providing real-time location data, allowing
operators to excavate to the correct depth and dimensions without manual
measuring.
Slopes.
Technology used to detect the presence of people around the machine.
The system of pressurised fluid used to power and control the movement
of the machine’s key components.
Cylinders that lift the skip to tip and discharge material.
Slopes, gradient.
Locking out the machine to prevent accidental start-up during maintenance
or inspection.
The dumper’s skip when it is fully loaded with material ready for transport
or unloading.
The maximum weight of material the dumper is designed and rated to carry
safely in its dump body.
Filling the skip with soil, rubble, or other materials, usually by a loader or
excavator.
The designated area where excavators or loaders load material into the
FTD.
The condition in which a load remains stable, secure, and contained during
transport, ensuring it does not shift, spill, or exceed the limits of the vehicle.
Maintaining balance when tipping, especially on slopes or uneven ground.
Ensuring that material is safely contained within the body and not
overloaded.
Transporting material (e.g., soil, aggregates, spoil) from a loading area to a
tipping area.
To move or control the machine. This involves adjusting the machine’s
direction, speed, or position for tasks.
Moving bulk materials, like soil, gravel, or sand, from one place to another.
The process of moving large volumes of earth or spoil from one area of a
site to another.
To move repeatedly from side to side or up and down between two points.
The machine carries more weight than its maximum safe payload, risking
damage and unsafe operation.
The interaction between workers (people) and machinery (plant).
If a container, etc. is pressurised, the air pressure inside it is higher than
the air pressure outside it.
Located at the back of the vehicle, the rear axle supports the rear wheels,
carries part of the load’s weight, and provides drive power to help propel
the dumper across the site.
Area around the machine that is high-risk.
Seat belt.
A loud alert sound to warn others when the machine is reversing.
The process of identifying hazards in the workplace.
Rollover Protective Structure – a safety feature in cabs to protect the
operator in case of a rollover.
A type of forward tipping dumper where the operator’s seat and controls
can rotate.
Actions with the machine can have significant health & safety
consequences.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 49 of 50

Safety Strut / Prop
Skip/ Bucket
Shoring
Slew / Slewing
Spoil
Spoil Removal
Straight Skip Dumper
Stockpiling
Stop Blocks
Sub-base
Swing Radius
Swivel Skip Dumper
Telematics
Tipping
Tipping Area/Zone
Tipping Stability
Towing

A strong rod, usually made from metal that helps support raised
components (i.e. skip/ booms)
The container that holds the load; tips forward to discharge material.
To make a trench stronger by supporting it
The rotation of the upper structure (cab and boom) of an excavator on its
undercarriage.
Waste material such as soil or rubble excavated from the ground and
transported by FTD.
Removing excavated material (soil, rocks, etc.) from the site.
type of forward tipping dumper with a fixed, non-rotating skip that tips
forward to unload material directly in front of the vehicle.
Depositing material in designated piles for later use or removal.
Concrete barriers or blocks used to prevent vehicle access.
A layer of material placed on top of the ground to provide a stable
foundation.
The area around an excavator that the upper structure can reach when
rotating.
A forward tipping dumper with a skip that can rotate, allowing the operator
to tip material to the side for easier unloading in tight or uneven spaces.
Remote monitoring systems used for tracking machine performance,
location, and maintenance needs.
Unloading material by tipping the skip forward over the front wheels.
The area where the dump body is raised to unload material.
The safe practice of tipping only on level, compacted ground to avoid
overturning.
The act of pulling or hauling another vehicle, trailer, or equipment using the
dumper, usually by attaching a tow bar or hitch.

Terrain

The physical characteristics and surface conditions of the ground,
including its slope, texture, hardness, and obstacles, which affect
how machinery and workers move and operate.

Traction
Traffic Management
Plan
Transmission
Trenches

Grip.
A site-specific layout that controls plant movement to prevent collisions.

Undercarriage
Unladen Skip
Visibility Aids

The system that transfers engine power to the wheels.
Narrow, deep excavations made in the ground, typically used for laying
pipes, cables, drainage systems, or foundations.
Includes the wheels, axles, suspension, frame, and related components
that support the machine, provide stability, and enable it to move and carry
loads safely across site.
The dumper’s skip when it is empty and not carrying any load.
Mirrors, cameras, or alarms to assist the operator’s awareness of
surroundings.

Learner Workbook FTD v4 June25
Page 50 of 50

